Feature/ood (#276)
hpcleuven/VscDocumentation: source/leuven/services/openondemand.rst

.. _ood_t2_leuven:
===========================================

> Open Ondemand on the KULeuven Tier2 cluster

Reviewer: Capitalization of Open OnDemand

===========================================

About
-----

Open OnDemand provides a user interface to HPC clusters from within a web browser. This tool supports a range of different apps and features that not only allow the
user to easily submit jobs from within the browser session, but also provide different coding GUIs, tools for plotting and more.

You can use this interface by navigating to the `KU Leuven Open Ondemand page`_. You can log in using your KU Leuven credentials. Access for vsc users from other 
organizations is not yet supported. Once logged in, you'll notice you are connected with your VSC account. 

> Open Ondemand is only available for the Tier-2 wICE cluster.

Reviewer: Capitalization of Open OnDemand

Use
---

> The KU Leuven Open Ondemand page provides a range of functions:

Reviewer: Capitalization of Open OnDemand

- Exploring, adapting and creating files
- Submitting and monitoring jobs, creating job templates

> - Using a shell

Reviewer 2: Maybe be a bit more specific here, e.g.
```suggestion
- Opening a shell on one of the login nodes
```

detail.

Files
-----

This menu provides a file explorer that allows you to navigate files by clicking. You can access your ``$VSC_HOME`` and ``$VSC_DATA`` folders. Other storage is not
available here. General file explorer options like moving, deleting, modifying and creating files or directories are available as well. You can also use this interface
to download and upload files to and from your local machine. Be aware that this is not recommended for very large files.

**Good to know:** the standard 'ctrl+s' sadly does not store your files on Open Ondemand, but will trigger a save on your local machine. Luckily, there is a quite 
obvious save button on the editor page.

Jobs
----

All jobs submitted from Open Ondemand will run on wICE. The Genius cluster is not supported. This also means that all your jobs should be submitted as **slurm** jobs.
For more detail on how to run jobs on wICE, check out our :ref:`quickstart guide <wice_t2_leuven>`_.

The jobs tab has two menus: 'Active Jobs' and 'Job Composer':

Active jobs
===========

> This lists all of your running, queued and completed jobs. Completed jobs will slowly dissapear after a couple of minutes. You have a handy overview of some job

Reviewer: disappear

details by clicking the large arrow next to the job id, including things like the node list, the account you used, the status of the job... It also gives you the
option to open the folder of the job script in the file manager. and thus inspect the created output and error files. 

If your job is still running, you can also delete it by clicking the bin under 'Actions'. The 'Active jobs' menu does not allow re-submission of your job. How to
(re-)submit jobs will be made clear in the next chapter.

> Job Composer

Reviewer 2: Could you start this section with 1 or 2 sentences explaining why one might be interested in the Job Composer? I suppose that will be clear when reading the whole section, but it would be good to already summarize this upfront, i.e. describing what the Job Composer can be useful for.

============

This part deserves some extra attention, as there is more to it than just simply creating and editing a .slurm file. Under the job composer tab you can find two other 
menus, namely 'Jobs' and 'Templates'. As templates are the backbone of job creation in Open Ondemand, we will start by explaining this. The 'Jobs' menu is pretty much 

> self-explanitory once understanding this.

Reviewer: explanatory

Job'-'From Template'. Once in this menu, you should see a table with 3 System Templates. The resources that are requested in these scripts are the default settings. 
The templates:

- CPU job template: this is a template for CPU jobs (batch partition). This is also the default template (which you will get when clicking 'From Default Template' under the 'New Job' button in the 'Jobs' menu).
- GPU job template: a template for creating GPU jobs 
- Big memory CPU jobs: a template to create job scripts that submit to the big memory partition instead of the default batch partition

You can create your own templates from scratch or by copying one of the existing templates. In both cases you will be redirected to a page where you can provide a
name, the cluster (only wICE) and add some notes. Once you save this, you will create a new folder in the templates folder 
``$VSC_DATA/ondemand/data/sys/myjobs/templates/``. This information will be saved in the ``manifest.yml`` file that is always present in each of the template folders. 

> Which other files that are present in this folder will depend on how you created your new template. If you use the 'New Template' button, it will also contain the job 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Which other files will be present in this folder depends on how you created your new template. If you use the 'New Template' button, it will also contain the job 
```
(makes the sentence a bit easier to read)

script of the default template, being the CPU job template. If you use the 'Copy Template' button, the contents of the folder will depend on the template you are
copying from. Use the system template that suit your needs the best when starting out. Once you use this more often, you can also use your own templates to create new
ones. Any file that is present in that folder, will be copied to your new one as well.

Once you've created the new template folder, you can start customizing it to your needs. You could of course immediately create a new job from it, adapt some

> extra options and launch it (which will be explained in the next chapter), but you can still further costumize your template folder first. You can view the files in

Reviewer: customize

> extra options and launch it (which will be explained in the next chapter), but you can still further custommize your template folder first. You can view the files in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extra options and launch it (which will be explained in the next chapter), but you can still further customize your template folder first. You can view the files in
```

the folder using the Folder Explorer (click 'View Files' on top or 'Open Dir' at the bottom). As explained above, you can edit or remove any file, create new files,
upload new files... These files will be present in each job you create from this template, which means you fully adapt this to the standard set-up you use for your
jobs.

Jobs
~~~~

The functioning of creating jobs is a bit similar to how you create new templates. Whatever method you choose, you will create a new folder for each job, this time

> located at ``$VSC_DATA/ondemand/data/projects/default/``. The job folders will be numbered according to the order you have created them in. **Do not change this folder name as long as you plan on using it from the job menus, as this will break the linking here.** When removing a job, the folder will be deleted as well. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
located at ``$VSC_DATA/ondemand/data/projects/default/``. The job folders will be numbered in the order you have created them. **Do not change this folder name as long as you plan on using it from the job menus, as this will break the linking here.** When removing a job, the folder will be deleted as well. 
```

- Cluster: there is no need to change this, as you only can specify 'wice'.
- Specify job script: if you have multiple job scripts in the directory, you can specify which one to run
- Account: here you can specify which account to use. **Be aware that this will overwrite the account you might have specified in your job script**

Everything should now be set up to start a job. Any job can be started by clicking 'Submit'. You can stop it at any time by clicking 'Stop'. You cannot use the 
'Submit' job to start the exact same job multiple times. You can use the 'New Job - From Selected Job' option for this. If you delete any of the jobs, you also remove
the folder that it is associated with. 

Clusters
--------

When selecting 'Clusters - Login Server Shell Access' you will get a terminal window in a new browser tab. You will arrive on one of the Genius login nodes, which
you can use as you are used to, including the option to submit jobs to wICE. As with the Genius login nodes, this means that this shell is not meant for any 

> calculations. If you would like to perform calculations in an interactive shell, you should be using the :ref:`interactive shell app<interactive_shell>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
calculations. If you would like to perform calculations in an interactive job, you should be using the :ref:`interactive shell app<interactive_shell>`
```

Also: I don't seem to have such an interactive shell app. I only see JupyterLab, RStudio, TensorBoard, VSCode, and the two that are work in progress (ParaView, CryoSparc).

Reviewer 2: OK, I see below that that app is still WIP as well.

Interactive apps
----------------

This menu provides a range of different apps that provide a GUI. In the background this means that you are submitting an interactive job to the cluster, in which the
app will be running.

To launch any of the interactive apps, you need to fill in the resources form. Be aware that you will end up in a regular queue, so requesting a large amount of 

> resources might result in a long queueing time. Between all the apps, most of these options are the same. Some apps require specific information. These will be 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
resources might result in a long queue time. Between all the apps, most of these options are the same. Some apps require specific information. These will be 
```

> explained in the specific chapter about the app. A general overview of the others can be found here:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
explained in the specific paragraph about the app. A general overview of the others can be found here:
```

> - Account: the credit account you want to deduct the credits from. The accounts associated with your vsc number will be displayed in a dropdown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Account: the credit account you want to deduct the credits from. The accounts associated with your VSC number will be displayed in a dropdown.
```

> - Partition: you can choose any of the existing partitions. If you require a GPU, you can of course only submit jobs to the gpu or interactive partitions. For the most general use-cases we recommend that you use the interactive partition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Partition: you can choose any of the existing partitions. If you require a GPU, you can of course only submit jobs to the `gpu` or `interactive` partitions. For the most general use-cases we recommend that you use the interactive partition.
```

out the `official documentation <https://docs.rstudio.com/>`_. 

The use is very similar to regular RStudio. It is recommended to install packages in a folder on your ``$VSC_DATA`` instead of the default location though, to
avoid clogging your ``$VSC_HOME``. You can do this by using the ``lib`` argument for both the ``install.packages`` and the ``library`` function.

**Remarks:**

- Navigating between your different directories is possible using the file explorer. If you are navigating by clicking the folder, you will notice that you can see all user folders. You do not have access to these, and you will receive an error when you try to open them. You will also notice that you cannot use the same way of navigating after this. Another solution is to click the three dots on the right (...) and enter your file location.
- The 'Tools-Install packages' interface does not allow you to select any other path than the default in your ``$VSC_HOME``. It is recommended to use the ``install.packages`` function instead.

Tensorboard
===========

> Tensorboard is an app that allows you to visualize and measure different ascpects of your machine learning workflow. Have a look at the `official guidelines <https://www.tensorflow.org/tensorboard/get_started>`_ for more detailed information. 

Reviewer: aspects

The Tensorboard interactive session requires you to specify a project (or log) directory in your submission options. This is a relative directory starting from your 
``$VSC_DATA``. It is not possible to navigate to the correct folder from within the app.

code-server
===========

This is the browser version of Visual Studio Code. For more information, check out `the official guidelines <https://code.visualstudio.com/docs>`_. As a default,
a Python and a Git module are already loaded, which means you can use both Python and git from a terminal window within code-server. How to open a terminal
window is probably one of the first things you should know: click on the three horizontal lines in the upper left corner, select 'Terminal - New Terminal'. This will
open a shell on the node you are running your session on. Notice that you are start in your ``$VSC_DATA`` folder. You can use this as a regular shell, meaning that you
can submit jobs, load modules and so on. 

> Code-server contains many different options and menus, which we won't discuss all. Feel free to explore them. We will however discuss how to set up code-server to use 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Code-server contains many different options and menus, and only a few will be discussed here. Feel free to explore them. We will however discuss how to set up code-server to use 
```

> any of the compatible languages and use code-server as an IDE. For each of the languages you want to use you need two things: an installation of the specific 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any of the compatible languages and use code-server as an IDE. For each of the languages you want to use, you need two things: an installation of the specific 
```

interpreter and an extension in code-server that allows you to connect to it. The extensions can be found in the 'extensions' menu. In what follows, the steps for
both Python and R are described. 

Python
++++++

There are multiple Python extensions available, so feel free to try and install the extension that suits you the best. This comes with the warning that only the

> Microsoft Python extension has been tested by our team. To install this extension, go to 'Extensions' and search for 'Pythonn'. Install the one with as developer

Reviewer: Python

them here as well).

If you need more information about creating your customized Python environments, have a look `here <https://docs.vscentrum.be/en/latest/software/python_package_management.html>`_. 

**Remarks:**

- Whenever loading a new Python interpreter,you will have to kill your current Python terminal before you will be able to use this new interpreter.

R
++++

While there are also multiple extensions for using R in code-server, these don't all work as they should. The main issue here is that these extensions were not
built with use on a cluster/server in mind. Also, these extensions are often built with the idea that you are only using one R version in the background, which
sadly limits the flexibility to switch between different environments, as you can do with Python environments. 

Even with these limitations, there is still a way to work with R in code-server. For this, you need to install the 'R' extension created by Ikuyadeu. Once this
is installed, you can specify the path in the settings (click the settings wheel of the extension, then click on 'Extension settings'): search for 'R > Rterm: Linux'

> and add the path to your preferred R installation. This can as well be a miniconda R installation. The packages in the environment will then also be available to you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and add the path to your preferred R installation. This can also be a miniconda R installation. The packages in the environment will then also be available to you.
```

If your job is still running, you can also delete it by clicking the bin under 'Actions'. The 'Active jobs' menu does not allow re-submission of your job. How to
(re-)submit jobs will be made clear in the next chapter.

Job Composer
============

The Job Composer contains the tools that allow you to set everything up for launching your jobs. This goes from basic job script building, adding necessary files, 
to building and using templates for easier job creation. Under the job composer tab you can find two other menus, namely 'Jobs' and 'Templates'. As templates are the 
backbone of job creation in Open OnDemand, we will start by explaining this. The 'Jobs' menu is pretty much self-explanatory once understanding this.

Templates
~~~~~~~~~

To enter the Templates menu, you can click on 'Templates' at the top once you are in the 'Job Composer' menu. You can also access this menu by clicking the button 'New 
Job'-'From Template'. Once in this menu, you should see a table with 3 System Templates. The resources that are requested in these scripts are the default settings. 
The templates:

> - CPU job template: this is a template for CPU jobs (batch partition). This is also the default template (which you will get when clicking 'From Default Template' under the 'New Job' button in the 'Jobs' menu).
> - GPU job template: a template for creating GPU jobs 
> - Big memory CPU jobs: a template to create job scripts that submit to the big memory partition instead of the default batch partition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CPU job template: a template for jobs on the thin nodes (the default `batch` partition). This is also the template you will get when clicking 'From Default Template' under the 'New Job' button in the 'Jobs' menu.
- GPU job template: a template for jobs with GPU resources (`gpu` partition).
- Big memory CPU jobs: a template for jobs with large memory requirements (`bigmem` partition).
```
(Condensing it a bit, and using backticks around the partition names)

To create a job, press the 'New Job' button and choose the option that suits your needs the most. You will get a new item in your job list for each job you've created. 
Again, you can edit, remove and add files like you want to create a custom job by going to the File Explorer (click 'Edit Files' or 'Open Dir') or by directly clicking 
the file names. The 'Open Editor' button in the 'Submit Script' overview also allows you to edit the job script directly.

Using the 'Job Options' button, you can add some more specifications to your job:

- Name: this will specify a name in the job composer list. This will not be your job name. The actual job name is the one that will be specified in the job script. If you do not specify a name there, you will see that that job gets the name 'sbatch' in the 'Active Jobs' menu.
- Cluster: there is no need to change this, as you only can specify 'wice'.

> - Specify job script: if you have multiple job scripts in the directory, you can specify which one to run
> - Account: here you can specify which account to use. **Be aware that this will overwrite the account you might have specified in your job script**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Specify job script: if you have multiple job scripts in the directory, you can specify which one to run.
- Account: here you can specify which account to use. **Be aware that this will overwrite the account you might have specified in your job script.**
```

calculations. If you would like to perform calculations in an interactive job, you should be using the :ref:`interactive shell app<interactive_shell>`

Interactive apps
----------------

This menu provides a range of different apps that provide a GUI. In the background this means that you are submitting an interactive job to the cluster, in which the
app will be running.

To launch any of the interactive apps, you need to fill in the resources form. Be aware that you will end up in a regular queue, so requesting a large amount of 
resources might result in a long queue time. Between all the apps, most of these options are the same. Some apps require specific information. These will be 
explained in the specific paragraph about the app. A general overview of the others can be found here:

- Account: the credit account you want to deduct the credits from. The accounts associated with your VSC number will be displayed in a dropdown.
- Partition: you can choose any of the existing partitions. If you require a GPU, you can of course only submit jobs to the `gpu` or `interactive` partitions. For the most general use cases we recommend that you use the `interactive` partition.

> - Numbers of hours: your walltime (min 1h)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Numbers of hours: your walltime (min 1h).
```

built with use on a cluster/server in mind. Also, these extensions are often built with the idea that you are only using one R version in the background, which
sadly limits the flexibility to switch between different environments, as you can do with Python environments. 

Even with these limitations, there is still a way to work with R in code-server. For this, you need to install the 'R' extension created by Ikuyadeu. Once this
is installed, you can specify the path in the settings (click the settings wheel of the extension, then click on 'Extension settings'): search for 'R > Rterm: Linux'
and add the path to your preferred R installation. If you would need to switch R versions, you need to change this path and restart your terminal. It is strongly 
recommended to use a miniconda environment for this. Not only can you use all the packages already installed in this environment, you also need to have the 
`languageserver` package installed. For your conda environment, go to a terminal and use following commands::

      source activate <env_name>
      conda install -c conda-forge r-languageserver
      

> Now you can use code-server as a R IDE as well. The first time you open up a script, you will get a warning that `languageserver` is not installed. You have to click

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you can use code-server as an R IDE as well. The first time you open up a script, you will get a warning that `languageserver` is not installed. You have to click
```
